Add drafts for monitoring guides (#20634)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/integrations/monitor/datadog.md

---
title: "Monitor Materialize with Datadog"
description: "Use Datadog to monitor Materialize."
menu:
  main:
    parent: ""
    name: 
---

Materialize exposes a system catalog that contains metadata about your running
Materialize instances. The system catalog consists of four schemas available
in all databases, which contain sources, tables, and views that expose
different types of metadata. 

This metadata can help you track and monitor your Materialize usage in tools
like Datadog.

For this guide, you'll setup a Datadog integration and create a dashboard to
monitor cluster performance, credit consumption, and memory usage.

We'll also share some helpful queries you can use in your observability tools to
keep track of other metrics important to you.

## Setup

Before you get started make sure you have the following:

> - Docker Compose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Docker
```

- Datadog API Key

This integration quick start uses the Prometheus SQL exporter Docker image to
pass data to and from your Materialize instance and Datadog agent.

> Clone the example repository and navigate to the `integrations/datadog`

Reviewer 2: Do we want to add a link to the demos repository here?

> Clone the example repository and navigate to the `integrations/datadog`

Author: ```suggestion
Clone the [example repository](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/demos/tree/main/integrations/datadog) and navigate to the `integrations/datadog`
```

directory.

Open the `config.yaml` file in your text editor and look for the `connections`
settings.

This `connections` setting monitors your Materialize cluster replica metrics for
CPU, memory, credit usage, and replica status. There are also queries to monitor
source and sink usage.

```yaml
...
connections:
- "postgres://<USER>:<PASSWORD>@<HOST>:<PORT>/materialize?sslmode=require"
...
```
You can copy this string from the Connect page in your Materialize region.

> > You need to escape the special `@` character in your user email for a
> > successful connection. For example, `name@email.com`, use `name%40email.com`.

Author: ```suggestion
{{< note >}}
You need to escape the special `@` character in your user email for a successful connection. For example, `name@email.com`, use `name%40email.com`.
{{</ note >}}
```

Create a new app password on the **Connect** page and paste it into the
`<PASSWORD>` section of the connection command.

Update the second `connections` setting near the end of the file. This
connection queries your Materialize storage usage and reports on objects using
storage resources.

Edit the `docker-compose.yaml` file with your Datadog API key and region:

```yaml
...
    environment:
     - DD_API_KEY=<API_KEY> 
     - DD_SITE=<DATADOG_REGION_ADDRESS>
...
```

## Deploy the SQL exporter and Datadog agents

In the current directory, run Docker to deploy the SQL exporter and the Datadog
agents. The SQL exporter tool uses the connection string you created in a
previous step to connect with your Materialize instance. 

```shell

> $ docker-compose up -d

Reviewer: I learned recently that we should start using `docker compose` rather than `docker-compose`. (A migration from a [very recent update](https://docs.docker.com/compose/migrate/))  
```suggestion
$ docker compose up -d
```

dashboard with some important information.

In the `datadog` directory, copy the contents of the `dashboard.json` file.

In your Datadog instance, navigate to the **Dashboards** section and select **
New Dashboard** in the upper right section. Name and create the new dashboard
then find the gear icon in the upper right navigation. Select **Import dashboard
JSON** and paste the contents of the `dashboard.json` file.

Once you import, your dashboard will display information
for your Materialize resources.

## Helpful queries

This dashboard returns a lot of useful information about your Materialize
resources, but there are some more metrics in the system catalog that you may
find useful.

In your `config.yml` file, you can add additional metrics to the SQL exporter.
To display specific information about a table, add  a new query to the
configuration.

```sql
queries:
- name: "total orders"
   help: "Total Orders"
   values:
   - "count"
   query:  |
           SELECT count(*) FROM orders
```

To add more complex queries, you can use the template above and edit the query
and values you expect the query to return.

> Monitor operator speed across workers:

Reviewer 2: Might be nice to add a reference to the [`mz_internal`](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/) docs page as all the example queries use tables from that schema

> Monitor operator speed across workers:

Author: ```suggestion

Most queries reference the `mz_internal` schema. For more information, visit the [`mz_internal` reference documentation](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/).

Monitor operator speed across workers:
```

```sql
SELECT mdo.id, mdo.name, mse.elapsed_ns
FROM mz_internal.mz_scheduling_elapsed AS mse,
     mz_internal.mz_dataflow_operators AS mdo
WHERE mse.id = mdo.id
ORDER BY elapsed_ns DESC;
```

Monitor operator speed by worker:

```sql
SELECT mdo.id, mdo.name, mse.worker_id, mse.elapsed_ns
FROM mz_internal.mz_scheduling_elapsed_per_worker AS mse,
     mz_internal.mz_dataflow_operators AS mdo
WHERE mse.id = mdo.id
ORDER BY elapsed_ns DESC;
```

Monitor active `SUBSCRIBE` dataflows:

```sql

> SELECT count(1) FROM (
>     SELECT id
>     FROM mz_internal.mz_dataflows
>     WHERE substring(name, 0, 20) = 'Dataflow: subscribe'
>     GROUP BY id
> );

Author: ```suggestion
SELECT count(1)
FROM   mz_internal.mz_subscriptions; 
```

dashboard with some important information.

In the `datadog` directory, copy the contents of the `dashboard.json` file.

In your Datadog instance, navigate to the **Dashboards** section and select 
**New Dashboard** in the upper right section. Name and create the new dashboard
then find the gear icon in the upper right navigation. Select **Import dashboard
JSON** and paste the contents of the `dashboard.json` file.

Once you import, your dashboard will display information
for your Materialize resources.

## Helpful queries

This dashboard returns a lot of useful information about your Materialize
resources, but there are some more metrics in the system catalog that you may
find useful.

In your `config.yml` file, you can add additional metrics to the SQL exporter.
To display specific information about a table, add  a new query to the
configuration.

```sql
queries:
- name: "total orders"
   help: "Total Orders"
   values:
   - "count"
   query:  |
           SELECT count(*) FROM orders
```

To add more complex queries, you can use the template above and edit the query
and values you expect the query to return.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

{{< warning >}}
Large queries can potentially overload the cluster and can lead to slow performance or memory errors. 
{{</ warning >}}

```

---
title: "Monitor Materialize with Datadog"
description: "Use Datadog to monitor Materialize."
menu:
  main:
    parent: ""
    name: 

> ---

Reviewer: Not for the sake of aliases but to have an access to the article inside the live Preview (unless there is an alternative way that I'm unaware of. In that case, sorry!)
```suggestion
aliases:
  /monitoring/datadog
---
```

different types of metadata. 

This metadata can help you track and monitor your Materialize usage in tools
like Datadog.

For this guide, you'll setup a Datadog integration and create a dashboard to
monitor cluster performance, credit consumption, and storage usage.

We'll also share some helpful queries you can use in your observability tools to
keep track of other metrics important to you.

## Setup

Before you get started make sure you have the following:

- Docker
- Datadog API Key

This integration quick start uses the Prometheus SQL exporter Docker image to
pass data to and from your Materialize instance and Datadog agent.

Clone the [example repository](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/demos/tree/main/integrations/datadog) and navigate to the `integrations/datadog`
directory.

Open the `config.yaml` file in your text editor and look for the `connections`
settings.

This `connections` setting monitors your Materialize cluster replica metrics for
CPU, memory, credit usage, and replica status. There are also queries to monitor
source and sink usage.

```yaml
...
connections:
- "postgres://<USER>:<PASSWORD>@<HOST>:<PORT>/materialize?sslmode=require"
...
```

> You can copy this string from the Connect page in your Materialize region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can copy this string from the [Connect page](https://console.materialize.com) in your Materialize region.
```

{{< note >}}
You need to escape the special `@` character in your user email for a successful connection. For example, `name@email.com`, use `name%40email.com`.
{{</ note >}}

Create a new app password on the **Connect** page and paste it into the
`<PASSWORD>` section of the connection command.

Update the second `connections` setting near the end of the file. This
connection queries your Materialize storage usage and reports on objects using
storage resources.

Edit the `docker-compose.yaml` file with your Datadog API key and region:

```yaml
...
    environment:
     - DD_API_KEY=<API_KEY> 
     - DD_SITE=<DATADOG_REGION_ADDRESS>
...
```

## Deploy the SQL exporter and Datadog agents

In the current directory, run Docker to deploy the SQL exporter and the Datadog
agents. The SQL exporter tool uses the connection string you created in a
previous step to connect with your Materialize instance. 

```shell
$ docker compose up -d
```

The Prometheus SQL exporter container runs a service that executes queries against your

> database and then exports the metrics in a format that most monitoring services

Reviewer: Only because a few lines after says `the Datadog agent with the OpenMetrics...`.
```suggestion
database and then exports the metrics using the OpenMetrics standard.
```

## Configure the Datadog dashboard

Now that the containers are running, your Datadog agent will reach out to the
Datadog endpoint. No metrics are being displayed yet, so let's configure the
dashboard with some important information.

In the `datadog` directory, copy the contents of the `dashboard.json` file.

In your Datadog instance, navigate to the **Dashboards** section and select 
**New Dashboard** in the upper right section. Name and create the new dashboard
then find the gear icon in the upper right navigation. Select **Import dashboard
JSON** and paste the contents of the `dashboard.json` file.

Once you import, your dashboard will display information
for your Materialize resources.

## Helpful queries

This dashboard returns a lot of useful information about your Materialize
resources, but there are some more metrics in the system catalog that you may
find useful.

In your `config.yml` file, you can add additional metrics to the SQL exporter.
To display specific information about a table, add  a new query to the
configuration.

```sql
queries:
- name: "total orders"
   help: "Total Orders"
   values:
   - "count"
   query:  |
           SELECT count(*) FROM orders
```

> To add more complex queries, you can use the template above and edit the query

Reviewer: One thing we should warn here is that the user should be cautious about the query. In the sense that a big query can overload the cluster and create issues:

Personal low quality example: _Be cautious when executing big queries, they have the potential to overload the cluster, leading to potential issues._

and values you expect the query to return.

Most queries reference the `mz_internal` schema. For more information, visit the [`mz_internal` reference documentation](https://materialize.com/docs/sql/system-catalog/mz_internal/).

Monitor operator speed across workers:

```sql
SELECT mdo.id, mdo.name, mse.elapsed_ns
FROM mz_internal.mz_scheduling_elapsed AS mse,
     mz_internal.mz_dataflow_operators AS mdo
WHERE mse.id = mdo.id
ORDER BY elapsed_ns DESC;
```

Monitor operator speed by worker:

```sql
SELECT mdo.id, mdo.name, mse.worker_id, mse.elapsed_ns
FROM mz_internal.mz_scheduling_elapsed_per_worker AS mse,
     mz_internal.mz_dataflow_operators AS mdo
WHERE mse.id = mdo.id
ORDER BY elapsed_ns DESC;
```

Monitor active `SUBSCRIBE` dataflows:

```sql

> SELECT count(1) FROM (

Reviewer: Just [a couple of hours ago](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/materialize/pull/20915#event-9978880001) this query was removed from the troubleshooting section in favor of using `mz_subscriptions`.

The updated query to monitor active `SUBSCRIBE` dataflows is as follows:

```sql
SELECT COUNT(1) FROM mz_internal.mz_subscriptions;
```
